 The following speech was delivered in Parliament today by DA Shadow Deputy Minister of Women, Terri Stander MP, during the Budget Vote on Women. Honourable Chairperson,If, reflecting on the number of tragic incidents reported on lately, you are asking who has failed our women and why &#8211; the answer is seated on that very bench today. Minister Susan Shabangu s core mandate is to champion the advancement of women s socio-economic empowerment and promote gender equality in the country.In response to my questions in a committee meeting, Minister Shabangu could not name a single thing attributed to her Department that meaningfully impacted the lives of South African women.Instead, she complained of underfunding and blamed her administration for being bloated , stuck with people who did not have the capacity, and that nothing could be done about it.More than 60% of the Department s budget is spent on salaries and services whilst core mandates are underfunded, and the Annual Performance Plan and indicators are changed as often as underwear.It is deeply concerning that the Department of Women has scant prioritisation and an unintelligible plan for women.Perhaps the lack of leadership and direction can be explained by statements made by Minister Shabangu during a recent interview with ENCA s Checkpoint. In discussing the tragic example of Karabo Mokoena s abuse and ultimate murder, the Minister said: Karabo came across as very strong, but internally she was weak, she was weak and hence she became a victim of abuse. Yet, today you have the audacity to deny that you said these words. Minister, you are a disgrace to the office you hold and you should be removed immediately, in the best interest of all women in South Africa.Women are not weak, Minister.Women have been failed by the weak ANC cadres in every Ministry and sphere of Government for 23 years!Every statistic that exposes the ANC s inadequate transformation within its own government departments highlights the horrific truth: little protects our women from oppression, abuse, rape, murder. Google them.To empower and unleash her potential, a girl must have access to quality education. It is common knowledge that the majority of black girls, especially in rural areas, miss around 50 days of school every year because of their period.If the Presidency can develop quiet, tasty condoms, why has nothing been done to assist these girls to have access to sanitary towels?Women deserve to feel safe, whether boarding public transport, walking down a street or simply being in their own homes.We know violence against women is not new, but we lack reliable and credible statistics.Why hasn t the Minister lobbied the Police Ministry to ensure accurate recording and publication of crime statistics relating to violence against women? This would assist your Department to lead, collaborate and oversee transformation that saves women s lives.The Minister s silence on the Traditional Courts Bill before Parliament is also really concerning. Women should not be required to be represented by men. Women must benefit from land redistribution and own titles.Any patriarchal practice that is not in line with the Constitution, like ukuthwala and female genital mutilation, must be stopped and prosecuted. A woman s vagina belongs to her. No man nor government can interfere, or dictate what she should or shouldn t do with it.We need more women to be entrepreneurs and sit at the top decision-making tables to drive economic growth that creates jobs.It is an indictment on the ANC that only 22% of people in top management positions are women. Even the ANC s own Government Departments, in every sphere, fail. Why don t women have the option of flexi-time or to work from home? Why don t women enjoy equal opportunities and receive equal pay for work of equal value?Chairperson, eggs, butter and Handy Andy will not bring change that empowers or protects our women.Thankfully the DA does care about women. When we govern nationally in 2019, we will prioritise the rights of women, because the lives of our women matter.